---
title: Teenager Self-Presentation and Their Digital Privacy
description: "meta description"
date: 2022-04-02T06:00:00+00:00
image: "/images/posts/03.jpg"
categories: ["Jurnal","International Paper"]
authors: [""]
tags: ["Digital Privacy", "Personal Information"]
draft: false
---

This study aims to determine the relationship between privacy management on Instagram and the selfpresentation of teenager. This study took a respondent sample of N=54 that belongs to a Generation Z cohort category. The respondents of this study were VII, VIII, IX grade students of Al Azhar Islamic
Middle School Kemang Pratama 9 Bekasi City, West Java. This study uses a positivist paradigm with a quantitative approach. This research design is correlational in order to determine the relationship between variables. The independent and dependent variables will be measured simultaneously through a cross-sectional approach. The questionnaire was chosen as a tool to collect data. The questionnaire was created using Google Forms and distributed through the WhatsApp application. This study uses close-ended questions where the respondent can only choose the answer according to the options provided in the questionnaire. The sampling technique used is purposive sampling, with the criteria of respondents being middle school students aged 12-14 years, having an Instagram account, and actively using Instagram for 1-3 years. The results of this study indicate that there is a strong relationship between privacy management on Instagram social media and middle school students' self-presentation.
Then, the form of the relationship between the two variables is positive, meaning that the higher the privacy management of middle school students on Instagram, the higher the self-presentation. 


## Introduction

## Principle 1: Ownership of Personal Information.
Some people define personal information as something they claim to be theirs. This means that ownership is used as a fundamental parameter of privacy. Everyone has the right to privacy, which can determine who can find his personal information. Then, everyone also has the flexibility to manage personal information how they want. Claims for ownership of personal information are perceptual and often based on belief Control of Personal Information. When people believe they have a right to personal information, they then assume a right to control that personal information.
People want to control the flow of personal information because of the risk that others may get the information they want to restrict. The level of control over each person's personal information varies depending on the level of risk of the personal information. Some control it very tightly so that the boundaries are pretty thick, and the outflow of information is minimal. There is also the opposite.
Information that is tightly controlled is often classified as confidential because access is limited, and very few people know about it. Medium controls, for example, information can only be accessed by some family members but not other family members. Finally, low control means more open access to personal information, permission to access it is easy, and privacy boundaries are elementary to penetrate.

## Principle 2:  Personal Information Rules.

This principle argues that people control the flow of personal information through a rulebased system. Rules are made to determine when, how, with whom, and in what way information access is given and denied. Usually, people have criteria for formulating and changing personal information rules. For example, cultural values can influence the assessment and management of privacy. An example of cultural values influencing the management of personal information is that people in the UK set higher privacy thresholds than people in Israel in addition to culture, gender criteria are often used to establish rules for personal information. Both men and women regulate access to information using various types of privacy rules. Motivational factors also play a role when someone makes privacy rules . The type of motivation varies. It can be because you want to achieve a goal or avoid the topic. Information rules for some people are flexible. If the adverse effect received is more significant when personal information is given to others, he can establish new rules to minimize these adverse effects. The last criterion is situational. These criteria sometimes interfere with changes to predefined privacy rules. For example, a husband and wife who are bound by marriage make a set of privacy rules that are agreed upon by each other. However, a few years later, they divorced so that the privacy rules that had been made were adjusted according to the situation. Thus, situational transformations often require concurrent changes in privacy rules Petronio & Caughlin,

## Principle 3: Shared Ownership and
Custody of Personal Information. When someone gives access to their personal information to another person, that person can be said to be a trusted person or guardian. This fourth principle is considered the most important and contributes to CPM theory for understanding privacy management. This principle provides the choice to identify privacy boundaries in the individual realm and the notion of privacy boundaries held collectively. Privacy boundaries can be private or shared. When privacy boundaries become shared property, trusted people or guardians are expected to set mutually agreed terms of privacy and management of personal information. Privacy rules can be negotiated to mitigate or prevent accidental invasion of privacy .
There are three types of negotiable privacy rule conditions. They are negotiating these conditions coordinate privacy boundaries, namely linkage rules, permeability rules, and ownership rules. Link rules are parameters for specifying people who can be added as owners of personal information. People who can be added as owners of personal information are those who are considered to know the information, and fall into the criteria of a trusted person, for example, mother, father, aunt, or cousin, level of intimacy, and topic relevance. The rules of permeability address how much other people can know about personal information. These rules govern access to and protection of shared personal information. Finally, ownership rules relate to how much control others have over managing personal information independently. This condition allows a trusted person to know personal information but is not given permission to do anything about that information. This means that trusted people do not have distribution rights and control of information because this has been regulated in their agreement . 


## Self-Presentation
Goffman first developed the concept of self-presentation in 1959. Goffman describes self-presentation as a way for people to negotiate and validate identity in direct communication and introduce a «frame» within it to evaluate the meaning of face-to-face meetings. According to Goffman, shame is an essential indicator of a person's failure to present an acceptable self and a person's primary motivator to project a good self-image. The point is that someone will try to present themselves more effectively to minimize the embarrassment of a failed selfpresentation. He will also be motivated to look good so that the embarrassment that comes from failure can be avoided. Therefore, when interacting, people tend to present themselves positively and try to match other people's selfpresentations. Therefore, when interacting, people tend to present themselves positively and try to match other people's self-presentations. In the current era of digitalization, computer-mediated communication forms a new framework for interaction. Although limited and less wealthy than face-to-face, computer-mediated communication provides new opportunities for self-presentation.
Through self-presentation, individuals are involved in impression management and information control in everyday life. Papacharissi analyzes that on the internet, people can control their information online for other people so that they can convey specific images. Boyd added that people would have more vital selfpresentation control than indirect interactions on the internet. They can carefully choose what information is shown to other users. Birnbaum's studies show that individuals will be careful about their impressions of Facebook. The goal is to communicate, interact with friends, and get support on Facebook. Evidence of self-presentation is selectively found in various spaces on the internet, including e-mail, forums, and online dating sites. Similarly, Tice, Butler, Muraven, and Stillwell found that people change their self-presentation to be more pleasant when interacting with strangers and tend to be less cautious when interacting with people who already know their background.
Loss et al. stated that social media allows people to «check, edit, and revise» their self-presentation before making it available to others. This editable self-presentation may increase motivation to engage in intentional impression management tactics and may also lead to more intense use of assertive and proactive self-presentation. Self-presentation tends to be done by individuals on purpose and want to be seen by others.
Individuals make conscious decisions about presenting themselves based on the people they interact with at any given time. Social media profiles serve as a stage where users can make public or semipublic presentations about themselves, and most often, users will seek to portray themselves in a positive light. Since this self-image is publicly displayed continuously, it is reasonable to assume that social media users use strategies that help present themselves as attractive to the public.
According to Jones and Pittman, self-presentation can be constructed through five strategies: ingratiation, competence, intimidation, exemplification, and supplication.
Someone who uses an ingratiation strategy aims to be liked by others. Individuals consciously do good or use flattery to gain the attribution of being liked by others. In the competence strategy, individuals will show their abilities and achievements to make them look competent. Through intimidation strategies, people will signal their power or potential to punish to be seen as dangerous.
Then in the exemplification strategy, individuals will present themselves as someone who can be a role model for others. The goal is for the individual to appear more respected.
Lastly, supplication a strategy to appear helpless so that others will come to help.
Characteristics of this approach include pleas for help and self-deprecation.
Instagram has become an essential social media in changing the role of photography.


## Instagram
Caliandro & Graham , Instagram is front and backstage for its users. Instagram's platform building allows its users to share nonprofessional photos. Therefore, Instagram allows users to share every day, worldly, and intimate photos.
Instagram's build sets it apart from other social media platforms. Even though it is not the first platform to make photos and images a part of its activities, the Instagram build differs from Flickr. Instagram users will build behavior that adapts to the platform's design or borrows
Gibbs's term «Instagram's vernacular culture.» The unique language and way of conveying it through the posting of photos and features are what Gibbs refers to as «vernacular culture.» In addition, Instagram provides space for users to add hashtags, geolocation, and mentions, which, although not a new feature, make the Instagram platform vernacular
This study uses a correlational research design to determine the relationship between variables. Through a cross-sectional approach, the independent and dependent variables will be measured simultaneously. The research paradigm is positivist with a quantitative approach that prioritizes objective thinking processes. Variable X in this study is privacy management with indicators, namely intimacy, personal disclosure, collective boundaries, personal boundaries, control, ownership, characteristics of privacy rules, boundary coordination, boundary turbulence, tension, and private openness . In comparison, the Y variable is self-presentation with indicators, namely ingratiation, intimidation, competence/self-promotion, exemplification, and supplication .
The questionnaire was chosen as a tool to collect data.
WhatsApp application. This study uses closeended questions where respondents can only choose answers according to the options provided in the questionnaire. Model questions include the identity of respondents and research questions that are adjusted to the indicators in each variable. The questionnaire measurement technique uses a Likert scale with four options, namely Strongly Disagree with a value of 1, Disagree with a value of 2, Agree with a value of 3, Strongly Agree with a value of 4.

