---
title: "Counter-Human Trafficking in East Nusa Tenggara: The Urgency of
Strengthening NGOs Role through Multilevel Collaborative Governance"
description: "meta description"
image: "/images/posts/05.jpg"
date: 2021-01-25T16:56:47+06:00
draft: false
authors: [""]
tags: ["Jurnal", "International"]
categories: ["Human Trafficing" , "NGO"]
---

Human trafficking has been one of the prolonged transnational organized crime issues in Indonesia, especially in East Nusa Tenggara Province . Though government has made some efforts to address the issue, the trafficking cases in the region still remains high. This research attempts to analyze and challenge the existing anti-trafficking scheme designed and performed by the government. Using a qualitative research method, this research found that the government has managed to include non-state stakeholders—such as NGOs and civil society organizations—in its counter-trafficking strategy. However, the role of non-state stakeholders are still limited and regarded as a mere technical support as well as an assistance provider for the trafficking victims, rather than engaged in an early and further strategic stage. The established cooperation tends to represent a partnership instead of a collaboration. This research highlights the urgency of redesigning counter-trafficking response in East Nusa Tenggara and strengthening the role NGOs through a collaborative multilevel governance, which emphasize further engagement of non-state stakeholder in policy-making process.
Keywords: Human trafficking; NGOs role; multilevel collaborative governance. 


## INTRODUCTION
The practice of human trafficking, as one of the most eerie transnational organized crime, has long been a phenomenon that may be experienced by various circumstances across the globe—regardless the age, gender, ethnicity, nationality, etc. Though human trafficking might occur in every region of the globe, Asia-Pacific region has been recognized as a significant region affected by human trafficking. United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime , reported that the ratio of the number of victims of trafficking in persons in the Asia-Pacific region reach 0.34 victims per 100,000 population in 2020. The region has faced notable challenges in combating human trafficking due to various factors such as porous borders, economic disparities, and demand for cheap labor and services. However, UNODC data only represents the number of victims detected and recorded by the authorities, while the actual casualty ratio could be higher 11 East Asian countries and 8 Pacific countries. As one of the countries situated in this region, Indonesia contributes a significant number of trafficking cases and is considered on the Tier 2 Watch List—indicating that Indonesia does not meet the minimum standards in addressing trafficking based on the Trafficking Victims Protection Act, and is at risk falling to Tier 3 which constitutes state’s failure on enhancing its efforts to address the crime. This research deliberately looks at East Nusa Tenggara Province , which constitutes the Top 3 contributor of human trafficking cases in Indonesia.3 Trafficking in persons in East Nusa Tenggara is commonly triggered by cultural and social-economic factors. The geographic condition of NTT province, its poverty rate, unequal development, and also the corrupt government have been the critical factors that have allowed the operations of trafficking syndicate last for a long period of time4. The syndicate utilized this situation to offer a better opportunity to those who have been seeking for employments. The poor education rate and skill then expose the recruited people to a more vulnerable situation to trafficking, and end up being a cheap-to-unpaid labor, or worse, trapped in prostitution business.  Based on the data from the Service Center for Placement and Protection of Indonesian Migrant Workers in Kupang , the number of non-procedural migrant workers from NTT who died abroad tended to show an upward trend during 2013–2018 . Referring to the data issued by the Witness and Victim Protection Agency , within 2015-2020 they had received 704 applications seeking for protection out of human trafficking. 438 of the victims were women and 266 of them were men. Among the 147 child-victims, there were 126 girls. Throughout 2021, as many as 83 corpses were returned to NTT, identified trapped in the non-procedural migration deal and ended up as human trafficking victims.5 It has been recorded that NTT posits the third position on human trafficking cases with the percentage of 8.24%.6 The summed up records from 2013-2021 indicate that human trafficking issue in Indonesia, specifically in NTT, has always been a prolonged multidimensional problem, thus requires a multifaceted response involving actors at all different levels. It is true that the government of Indonesia—both the central and local government—has indeed paid their attention to this issue and attempted to address the issue by responding the complex problem with the enactment of regulations, laws, and policies. The governments have also created a collaboration engaging civil society networks. However, it is still UNODC. 2022. Global Report on Trafficking in Persons 2022. Vienna: United Nations Office On Drugs and Crime. US Department of State. 2022. 2022 Trafficking in Persons Report: Indonesia. US Department of State. insufficient to eradicate human trafficking practices in the region, as we still see the high number of trafficking cases on the previous data. This research highlights despite the governments have issued many regulations and policies, they are still not strategically designed still do not grant an active involvement and authority to the other actors on its execution in the field. It is important to underline that through its links to organized crime and corrupt government, human trafficking undermines both human and state security. The government will not be able to work only on their own to counter trafficking. The roles of non-state actors are also vital in guarding to what extend has the government progressed and enforced the law, in order to create a well-functioned governance. Therefore, in tackling such a complex crime as trafficking, a strategic planning which involves the collaboration and participation of all relevant actors and stakeholders, specifically the Non-Governmental Organizations on the designed scheme is urgently required. In the context of counter-trafficking, a significant role of NGO collaborative multilevel governance is needed as a comprehensive strategy to eventually address human trafficking issues. This research attempts to investigate despite the efforts made by the government of Indonesia—both central and local government, why human trafficking issue in East Nusa Tenggara remains a major problem until the present time. It is undeniable that the NGOs have gradually been involved as the actors in tackling the issue, yet have not contributed any significant progress. This research seeks to figure the hole within the existing governance scheme and analyze to what extend NGOs could participate within then scheme. 



## ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK
This research employs multilevel collaborative governance as the conceptual framework to analyze the pattern of the existing counter-human trafficking scheme in East Nusa Tenggara, and to figure what has been missing on its execution. Stoker conveyed that multilevel collaborative governance are multidimensional concepts, employed in multifaceted disciplines, perspectives, and community-level engagements. This kind of multifaceted concepts allows a dynamic and wide range definition of ‘governance’. It may be interrelated to international relations and political studies, organizational studies, or development studies7. The concept of collaborative multilevel governance, arose primarily as a result of criticism and evaluation over state incapability to meet the public’s urgent demands8. This situation encourage the non-state actors to seek a new answer to the existing problem and get themselves involved to address the problem. The concept of multilevel collaborative governance highlights the reduction of state’s solitary role, and distributes range of responsibilities to the other actors—lower level government agencies, community-level organizations, and private sectors. The central governments streamlines policies through collaboration and coordination with the agencies at the local-level government. Furthermore, the local-level governments are given more authority, duties, as well as financial resources than ever, in order to thoroughly address the issue9. Despite this interaction indicates a vertical dispersion of power, it does not necessarily constitute a hierarchical relations. The power of actors at higher level is not always greater than that of actors at lower level. Instead, it represents a form of decentralization, where issues, roles, and responsibilities are being specified through a bottom-up and top-down approach—up to supranational institutions and down to regional or local government. Stoker, G. 1998. «Governance as theory: Five propositions Ansell and Gash pointed out how a collaborative governance requires the engagement of multiple stakeholders in collective forums with state institutions in a consensus-oriented decision-making process. Ansell and gash emphasized six pre-requisites of a collaborative governance. First, the initiative must come from the government institutions. Second, it must include non-state stakeholders as the active participants in the cooperation. Third, the participants must actively and directly engaged in the decision-making process. Fourth, the forum is arranged in a formal manner and meets collectively. Fifth, the decision made in the forum must be through consensus. Sixth, the ultimate goal of the collaboration is the establishment of policy and its implementation that fulfills the peoples’ needs. Such collaborative governance requires state agencies and non-state stakeholders to work collectively in distinctive way, as each actor has their own unique role and function. The NGOs and civil society organizations involvement in policy-making process should represent the third party interest, including the victims’ needs and interest. Though engaged in decision-making process, NGOs should stay in their nature which is providing assistance and support, and runs its function to critically oversight the implementation of the established anti-trafficking policies. Meanwhile the government must guarantee the security of its population, consider NGOs suggestions, and strategically accommodate the public urgent needs and demands. 

## METHODOLOGY
The method used in this research is qualitative method with a descriptive analytic pattern by using conceptual framework to highlight the urgency of strengthening the NGOs role through the collaborative multilevel governance to counter trafficking in East Nusa Tenggara. In order to achieve the research objective, the researchers used secondary data, obtained through library research. The collected data are relevant to confirm whether or not the present counter-trafficking collaboration scheme in East Nusa Tenggara has allowed NGOs to participate profoundly. The data include books, journal articles, policies and laws on human trafficking, official documents and reports from Statistic Witness and Victim Protection Agency , as well as other reliable sources. To validate the claim that human trafficking problem in East Nusa Tenggara province has been protracted and at emergency level, the researchers presented the trafficking data in the range of 2013-2021 to see its trend tendency. Subsequent to the data collection, the data were processed with triangular technique and contested to verify each data or information, brought about a new finding. Looking at the ideal six pre-requisites of multilevel collaborative governance concept, the researchers only pointed out the critical role of NGOs within the scheme of how the collaboration was initiated; what actors were involved, and their engagement during the decision-making process; what kind of forum they arranged—formal manner or not; whether or not the forum has been through a consensus; and whether or not the implementation has fulfilled the people’s needs.  As this research mainly attempts to investigate to what extend the role of NGOs within the collaboration—instead of to what extend the collaboration has worked, the researchers do not elaborate each pre-requisite in specific manner. Ansell, Chris, and Alison Gash. 2008. «Collaborative governance in theory and practice emphasizes on the urgency of revisiting and reformulating the existing counter-trafficking approach to be more strategic by highlighting the need to strengthen NGOs role within the collaboration scheme.

## ANALYSIS
The unequal development in Indonesia has created discrepancy between urban and rural area, which directly and indirectly contributes to the high rate of migration flow.
Tenggara Province occupies the top ten provinces for migrant workers-sending. Most of these workers are identified prefer undertaking the migration with a non-procedural channels, as it offers them shortcuts and greater possibility of getting their application ‘accepted’, compared to the procedural steps which they find more complicated and strict11. Central Statistics Bureau shows that NTT is posited on the third rank as the province with the highest poverty rate after Papua and West Papua, with a percentage of 20.90% 12. The Agency of Indonesian Migrant Workers Protection records that NTT was ranked 11th as the contributor to Indonesian Migrant Workers13. These two data show the relation between poverty rate and migration flow, and its implication to the high number of human trafficking cases originated from NTT. It can be seen from the graph of human trafficking cases ranged from 2015 to 2019, recorded by the Indonesian Ministry of Social Affairs . The number of human trafficking victims originating from NTT tends to be fluctuating , experienced an upward and downward trend during 2015-2019 period. However, it is undeniable that the number of victims recorded from this province is still considered high as it had been consistently constitute above 300 lives detected per year—while the greater number of the undetected remains unknown. This indicates that the issue of human trafficking in NTT is an emergency, protracted and has not been handled strategically. Hutami identified the core factors that perpetuates human trafficking practices in NTT is the lagging in human-centered development—which is measured from the accessibility of people to education and healthcare, as well as socio-economic welfare of the community in the region. Statistics Bureau reported the human development index of NTT Province is the third lowest across Indonesia, valued at 64.39 with a human development growth rate of 1.04%, lagging far behind the national HDI average of 70.4214. The low value of human development index of NTT Province represents the life quality of its population. It is obvious that the unequal development and its orientation putting human development on the last page, have created such systemic problem that impoverish the population and makes them more vulnerable to being trafficked. Beside its human development issue, the geographic condition of NTT—a dry area with uncertain climate—also become the driving factor for the population to commit migration and seek for better opportunity, as they cannot rely on the agricultural productivity15. Broadly speaking, the human trafficking practices in NTT are unlikely to happen without the significant role of globalization which brings all forms of ease and allow rapid mobilizations. The low level of human development—in terms of education and ability to sort out reliable information—contributes making them often trapped by the syndicates who manipulatively take advantage of others situation through globalization and operate in a covert and organized manner. Oftentimes the human trafficking victims are not aware of being a victim as they were manipulated to believe that they were sent out under their consent. In some cases, the victims may not be aware of being exploited as sometimes they earn more income abroad compared to in their origin country16. It also happens due to the varied perceptions among the public regarding the definition of human trafficking itself—one of which is caused by the role of syndicates in framing offers to work abroad as if based on the consent and approval of the migrant workers at the beginning of the offer, which is actually part of their strategy of fraud and manipulation. It has been more than a decade since the study carried out by the US Department of State in 2008 examined trafficking issues in Indonesia and placed it on the Tier-2. Today, instead of getting more advanced in addressing the issue, Indonesia was downgraded to Tier-2 Watch List17. It indicates that Indonesia has failed even on the prevention step and failed in providing protection to the victims.
It also shows that the government has not fully complied with the minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking, but still making efforts to meet those standards18. It is important to highlight that Indonesian government does have many legal tools to counter human trafficking yet having limited capacity and low engagement of the officials in eliminating the crime—since they are the main elements in law enforcement. Following are the legal instruments enacted by the Indonesian government to prevent and combat trafficking:
- Law No. 21 of 2007 about Elimination of Human Traffickin Crimes
- Law No. 13 of 2003 about Manpower
- Law No. 18 of 2017 about Protection of Migrant Workers
- Government Regulation No. 4 of 2015 concerning Supervision of the Placement and
Protection of Indonesian Migrant Workers Abroad;
- Minister of Manpower Regulation No. 39 of 2016 about Manpower Placement;
- Minister of Manpower Regulation No. 9 of 2019 about Procedures for Placement of
Indonesian Migrant Workers;

## CONCLUSION
Referring to the prolong human trafficking issue in East Nusa Tenggara, a meaningful
engagement of NGOs and civil society organizations is urgently needed and must be included in the counter-trafficking strategy through a multilevel collaborative governance. The solitary role of a state would not be sufficient to strategically address such transnational organized crime as trafficking. It requires multifaceted response and approach that able to answer the problem from all dimensions. This research highlights the participation of NGOs and civil society organizations that is still limited and shallow on its execution. The Indonesian government, just as any other governments across the globe, has actually included NGOs on their anti-trafficking efforts. However, the NGOs’ roles are still regarded as a mere service provider to the government, which is just a part of mission and policy implementation only. They have been particularly assigned only to complement government’s efforts in anti-trafficking response, especially fulfilling the needs of providing assistance and protection for trafficking victims. The existing partnership and collaborative scheme needs to be reviewed for better improvement. An effective counter-trafficking strategy should be conducted in a collaborative platform with non-state stakeholders being involved in the policy and decision-making process. Thereby different ideas being exchanged among different type of stakeholders, including the government, civil organizations and NGOs, as well as the private sectors. In this kind of cooperation a firm separation line needs to be drawn clearly in order to avoid any potential conflicts that might happen either among the stakeholders within the collaborative platform or between the NGOs and
society outside the platform who will always oversight the adhered NGOs independence principle



